Cáceres2014407 > Maximising the phytochemical content and antioxidant activity of Ecuadorian brown rice sprouts through optimal germination conditions

> Patricio J. Cáceres; Cristina Martínez-Villaluenga; Lourdes Amigo; Juana Frias

>2013

Germinated brown rice (GBR) is considered a healthy alternative to white rice in the fight against chronic diseases. As the functional quality of GBR depends on genotype and germination conditions, the objectives were to identify suitable Ecuadorian brown rice cultivars and optimal germination time and temperature to maximise ?-aminobutyric acid (GABA), total phenolics compounds (TPC) and antioxidant activity of GBR. Regression models for the prediction of phytochemical composition and antioxidant activity in GBR were also obtained. Germination improved GABA, TPC and antioxidant activity in all cultivars. Maximum GABA and antioxidant activity were attained at 34 C for 96 h, while the highest TPC was found at 28 C for 96 h in all cultivars. GBR cv. GO displayed the highest antioxidant activity and cv. 15 was the most effective at accumulating GABA and TPC in the optimal germination conditions. Therefore, Ecuadorian GBR could be used for the preparation of functional foods serving as preventative strategies in combating chronic diseases. © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




Díaz-Ocampo2014791 > Rheology of commercial and model borojó jam formulations
> R. Díaz-Ocampo
> Rubén Sánchez
> José Mª Franco
> 2014
The rheological behavior of model and commercial borojó (Borojoa patinoi Cuatrec.) jams was analysed as a function of temperature (5-60°C). Model borojó jam formulations were prepared by modifying pectin concentration. Both small-amplitude oscillatory shear and steady flow measurements were performed. Rheological results were also compared with those obtained with a traditional commercial peach jam. The Herschel-Bulkley model was used to describe the steady flow behaviour. In general, all rheological parameters increased with pectin concentration and decreased with temperature. Arrhenius-type relationships were used to quantify the influence of temperature on several viscoelastic and viscous flow parameters. Model borojó jam formulations exhibited higher temperature dependence of linear viscoelastic functions than peach jam samples but lower than borojó commercial jam. The influence of temperature on the yield stress was more important in model borojó formulations than in both commercial jams. Copyright © Taylor and Francis Group, LLC.





Brokamp2014257 > Productivity and management of Phytelephas aequatorialis (Arecaceae) in Ecuador

> Grischa Brokamp; H. Borgtoft Pedersen; Rommel Montúfar; Janice Jacome; Maximilian Weigend; Henrik Balslev
> 2014

Phytelephas aequatorialis is endemic to western Ecuador. Vegetable ivory (tagua, the hard endosperm) and leaves for thatch (cade) are harvested from the palm and commercialised. Export of vegetable ivory from Ecuador reached a value of 14 million US$ in 2011, making it the second most important product from native palms in the country. Vegetable ivory and leaves are harvested mainly from the wild, although the palm is occasionally cultivated. Most seeds harvested for vegetable ivory are collected from the ground. In times of high demand, however, some harvesters collect immature infructescences; these young seeds are of inferior quality and unsuitable for the fabrication of tagua discs for export. Premature harvest reduces the amount of fully mature, high-quality seed leading to resource limitation for the processing industry that already is unable to satisfy international demand. Fruit production in lowland agroforestry systems strongly correlates to the level of exposure to light. The development of infructescences takes 3 years in the lowlands (?93 m a.s.l.) and over 4 years on the Andean slopes at around 1400 m a.s.l. Data from 365 tagged individuals show that male palms produce significantly more leaves than female palms and palms growing in the shade produce fewer, but longer and higher quality leaves for thatch. Leaf harvest has little impact on leaf production, but substantially reduces fruit production. Natural regeneration of Phytelephas populations in pastures is negatively affected, rendering the survival of these populations problematic. Sustainable use and commercialization of the two partially exclusive and locally competing products tagua (vegetable ivory) and cade (leaves for thatch) must be carefully designed. Application of unsustainable practices in the harvest of seeds and leaves, population decline in pastures, and resource limitation in the processing industry represent the main challenges in the sustainable use of this valuable palm species in the future. © 2014 Association of Applied Biologists.






Arancibia2014710 > Antimicrobial and antioxidant chitosan solutions enriched with active shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) waste materials

> Mirari Y. Arancibia; Ailén Alemán, Marta M. Calvo; M. Elvira López-Caballero; Pilar Montero; M. Carmen Gómez-Guillén

> 2013

Several shrimp active materials, including protein concentrates, protein hydrolysates and a carotenoid extract, were recovered from shrimp ( Litopenaeus vannamei) processing residues (head and exoskeleton) and characterized in terms of chemical composition and antioxidative properties (Ferric ion reducing power and ABTS radical scavenging capacity). Different coating solutions were prepared by solubilizing chitosan, which was obtained from the residual chitinous material, in lactic acid and blending it with the various recovered materials. Chitosan-based solutions were tested for their viscosity and their antioxidative and antimicrobial properties against 26 selected microbial strains. All blend solutions showed higher antioxidant capacity and reduced viscosity as compared to the base chitosan solution. The incorporation of an astaxanthin-rich protein concentrate increased the antimicrobial capacity of the blend solution, but no further effect was observed after extra addition of the carotenoid extract. © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.





BrysonJr2014587 > Diversification across the New World within the  blue  cardinalids (Aves: Cardinalidae)

> Robert W. Bryson Jr.; Jaime Chaves; Brian Tilston Smith; Matthew J. Miller; Kevin Winker; Jorge L. Pérez-Emán; John Klicka;

> 2013

Aim: To examine the history of diversification of  blue  cardinalids (Cardinalidae) across North and South America. Location: North America (including Middle America) and South America. Methods: We collected 163 individuals of the 14 species of blue cardinalids and generated multilocus sequence data (3193 base pairs from one mitochondrial and three nuclear genes) to infer phylogeographical structure and reconstruct time-calibrated species trees. We then estimated the ancestral range at each divergence event and tested for temporal shifts in diversification rate. Results: Twenty-five lineages of blue cardinalids clustered into two major clades: one confined to North America, and a second concentrated in South America. Blue cardinalids probably originated in North America, but reconstructions were influenced by how migrant taxa were assigned to biogeographical regions. Most of the pre-Pleistocene divergences between extant taxa occurred in the North American clade, whereas most divergences in South America and adjacent Middle America occurred during the Pleistocene. Despite these differences, the rate of diversification for both clades has been similar and relatively constant over the past 10 million years, with little geographical exchange between North and South America outside the Panamanian isthmus region. Main conclusions: Our reconstruction of the diversification history of blue cardinalids indicates a role of both Neogene and Quaternary events in generating biotic diversity across North and South America. Although ancestral area reconstruction suggests a possible North American origin for blue cardinalids, the occurrence of seasonal migration in this group and their relatives limits inference. Our study highlights the importance of considering ecological and behavioural characteristics together with palaeogeological events in order to gain an understanding of the diversification history of widespread, mobile taxonomic groups. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.








Oleas20141 > Population genetics of the Federally Threatened Miccosukee gooseberry (Ribes echinellum), an endemic North American species

> Nora H. Oleas; Eric J von Wettberg; V. Negrón‐Ortiz

> 2014

Ribes echinellum (Coville) Rehder (Miccosukee gooseberry; Grossulariaceae) is a Federally Threatened species known from only two localities: Jefferson County (Florida, FL) and McCormick County (South Carolina, SC). This perennial shrub, ca. 1 m tall, is deciduous, and reproduces both vegetatively (clonal growth) and sexually (seed production). Recent surveys of the FL population revealed a dramatic decline in plant numbers. To assist in conservation and management of this species in FL and SC populations, microsatellite genetic markers were used to identify genotypes and assess the genetic structure of R. echinellum. We genotyped seven microsatellite loci in 102 individuals: 74 collected in FL and 28 in SC. Unbiased heterozygosity was between 0.28 and 0.53. All seven loci were polymorphic, showing a range of 1.52-2.13 effective number of alleles per locus (mean = 1.75). The two populations of R. echinellum show low genetic diversity, especially in SC. Clonality was not widespread, but was higher in the SC population. Both populations show signatures of bottlenecks but isolation by distance was not evident. We found significant deviation from HW equilibrium, with higher number of heterozygotes than expected. However when HW test was done for the combined populations as two separate groups, only FL showed a significant HW test and for SC the test was non-significant. Bayesian analysis and FST values suggest high genetic divergence between the populations. These results are important for developing a recovery plan and an ex situ and reintroduction conservation programs. © 2014 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht (outside the USA).







Marques2014113 > Costs and benefits of the mixed-mating system of narcissus serotinus (amaryllidaceae) in the conservation of small fragmented populations

> Isabel Marques; David Draper; José María Iriondo

> 2014

Small fragmented populations often exhibit reduced plant-pollinator interactions and scarce outcrossing opportunities. In this context, mixed-mating systems can be advantageous since selfing can provide reproductive assurance, but they may also carry relevant costs such as those involved in inbreeding depression. This study examines the advantages and costs of selfing in Narcissus serotinus L., a mixed-mating geophyte that currently occurs in several fragmented populations in Portugal, that resulted from the construction of the largest European dam. Observation of pollinators revealed that cross-pollination is less frequent in small than in large populations. Manual self-pollinations significantly increased fruit and seed set in small-size populations, also suggesting limited insect pollination. The existence of selfing may provide reproductive assurance in small-size populations of N. serotinus where outcrossing pollination is reduced. Although floral biology and experimental pollinations showed that N. serotinus is capable of autonomous selfing, four of the six fitness traits studied showed significant inbreeding depression in all populations. The high levels of inbreeding depression found in N. serotinus suggest that the initial reproductive assurance advantage of selfing may be counterbalanced by lower survival of the resulting individuals and a decrease in the evolutionary potential of the populations.






Martínez-Sanz2014 > Macroinvertebrate richness importance in coastal tropical streams of esmeraldas (Ecuador) and its use and implications in environmental management procedures

> Carlos Martínez-Sanz; Sara María Puente-García; Eduardo Rodolfo Rebolledo; and Pedro Jiménez-Prado

> 2014

This study was aimed at determining the performance of some indices and community attributes frequently used to assess river quality and test the role of macroinvertebrate taxa richness as element of bioindication in several coastal tropical streams of western Esmeraldas (Ecuador). In addition, a macroinvertebrate taxon list of this region was provided for the first time. Thirteen sampled points distributed across nine streams were selected for this study and nineteen parameters and attributes of bioindication were tested. The differences between nonimpact and impact places were evaluated mainly using one-way analysis of variance. Jackknife 2 and Clench were used to estimate the regional richness and the quality of the inventory, respectively. Seventy taxa (principally genus and family) of the main groups of macroinvertebrates were collected. Measured richness and family richness were the best metric followed by Biological Monitoring Working Party/Colombia (BMWP/Col), Odonata richness, Shannon-Weiner, and EPT richness (Ephemeroptera + Plecoptera + Trichoptera) indices. Only a slight right trend (Ephemeroptera, Trichoptera, and Chironomidae attributes) or incorrect performances (Average Score Per Taxon (ASPT) and % EPT) were showed by frequently used metrics. Finally, several recommendations were made about taxonomic level used, the ranks of quality of taxa richness, and the effort-results relationship in the field of bioindication. © 2014 Carlos Martínez-Sanz et al.







Bottazzi2014137 > Productive diversification and sustainable use of complex social-ecological systems: A comparative study of indigenous and settler communities in the Bolivian Amazon

> Bottazzi, Patrick; Reyes-García, Victoria; Crespo, David; Mathez-Stiefel, Sarah-Lan; Soria Galvarro, Harry; Clavijo, Marcelo; Jacobi, Johanna; Rist, Stephan

> 2014

Agricultural and forest productive diversification depends on multiple socioeconomic drivers-like knowledge, migration, productive capacity, and market-that shape productive strategies and influence their ecological impacts. Our comparison of indigenous and settlers allows a better understanding of how societies develop different diversification strategies in similar ecological contexts and how the related socioeconomic aspects of diversification are associated with land cover change. Our results suggest that although indigenous people cause less deforestation and diversify more, diversification is not a direct driver of deforestation reduction. A multidimensional approach linking sociocognitive, economic, and ecological patterns of diversification helps explain this contradiction. © 2014 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.


Zambrano20141 > Genetic analysis of resistance to six virus diseases in a multiple virus-resistant maize inbred line

> Jose Luis Zambrano; Mark W. Jones; Eric Brenner; David M. Francis; Adriana Tomas; Margaret G. Redinbaugh

> 2014

Key message: Novel and previously known resistance loci for six phylogenetically diverse viruses were tightly clustered on chromosomes 2, 3, 6 and 10 in the multiply virus-resistant maize inbred line, Oh1VI. Abstract: Virus diseases in maize can cause severe yield reductions that threaten crop production and food supplies in some regions of the world. Genetic resistance to different viruses has been characterized in maize populations in diverse environments using different screening techniques, and resistance loci have been mapped to all maize chromosomes. The maize inbred line, Oh1VI, is resistant to at least ten viruses, including viruses in five different families. To determine the genes and inheritance mechanisms responsible for the multiple virus resistance in this line, F1 hybrids, F2 progeny and a recombinant inbred line (RIL) population derived from a cross of Oh1VI and the virus-susceptible inbred line Oh28 were evaluated. Progeny were screened for their responses to Maize dwarf mosaic virus, Sugarcane mosaic virus, Wheat streak mosaic virus, Maize chlorotic dwarf virus, Maize fine streak virus, and Maize mosaic virus. Depending on the virus, dominant, recessive, or additive gene effects were responsible for the resistance observed in F1 plants. One to three gene models explained the observed segregation of resistance in the F2 generation for all six viruses. Composite interval mapping in the RIL population identified 17 resistance QTLs associated with the six viruses. Of these, 15 were clustered in specific regions of chr. 2, 3, 6, and 10. It is unknown whether these QTL clusters contain single or multiple virus resistance genes, but the coupling phase linkage of genes conferring resistance to multiple virus diseases in this population could facilitate breeding efforts to develop multi-virus resistant crops. © 2014 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg (outside the USA).







Marques2014 > Multiple hybridization events, polyploidy and low postmating isolation entangle the evolution of neotropical species of Epidendrum (Orchidaceae)
> Isabel Marques; David Draper; Lorena Riofrío; Carlos Naranjo
> 2014
Background: Hybridization and polyploidy are central processes in evolution and speciation. These mechanisms often lead to complex patterns of genetic variation and the creation of novel genotypes, which may establish if they become isolated from gene flow. However, in the absence of reproductive isolation, species boundaries might easily be disrupted. Here, we used a combination of AFLPs, chloroplast DNA markers and flow cytometry to investigate the evolutionary outcomes of hybridization between two endemic Ecuadorian species of Epidendrum (E. madsenii and E. rhopalostele) in three hybrid zones. Postmating isolation was also quantified to determine the role of this barrier in restraining gene flow between hybrids and the parental species. In addition, future ecological niche models were constructed to predict the outcomes of hybridization between these species. Results: Our results confirmed the presence of hybrids in all hybrid zones, but revealed that a third parental species (E. falcisepalum) has contributed to one of the hybrid zones studied. Backcross genotypes were frequent in all hybrid zones, which was in accordance with the absence of strong reproductive barriers. The process of hybridization was highly asymmetric and followed in some cases by polyploidy. The projection of future niche models predicted a severe reduction in the area suitable for the occurrence of these species, although favorable conditions will still occur for the existence of the current hybrid zones. Conclusions: The recurrent process of hybridization has compromised the genetic integrity of the parental species. Most individuals of the parental species can no longer be considered as pure-bred individuals because most were classified as backcrossed hybrids. Novel genetic lineages occur in all hybrid zones implying that hybrids are fertile and can compete with the parental species. These results, together with the prediction of suitable conditions for the future occurrence of these hybrid zones, highlight the importance of conserving these geographic areas as sources of novel taxonomic entities. © 2014 Marques et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.










